Addeed a tutorial detailing how to execute nf-core pipelines in google colab (#3470)
nf-core/website: sites/docs/src/content/docs/tutorials/google_colab/nf-core-colab-guide.md

---
title: "Running nf-core Pipelines on Google Colab"
subtitle: "A guide to running and interacting with nf-core pipelines using Colab and VS Code"
---

# Introduction

Running nf-core pipelines can be computationally intensive, requiring resources not easily available to students, newcomers, or participants in hands-on training workshops.

> This tutorial shows two ways you can use Google Colab to run nf-core pipelines entirely in the cloud, either in a browser-based execution or connected to VS Code via the vscode-colab package for a full development experience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial shows two ways you can use Google Colab to run nf-core pipelines entirely in the cloud, either in a browser-based execution or connected to VS Code via the `vscode-colab` package for a full development experience.
```

While Colab has limitations, such as session timeouts and a lack of root access, it offers a free and accessible platform ideal for learning, teaching, and prototyping workflows in resource-constrained environments.
Also make sure to checkout the [blogpost](https://nf-co.re/blog/2025/nf-core-colab-guide) on this topic for deeper insights and more tips for running nf-core pipelines using Colab.

# Setting up the environment in Google Colab

> After opening a Colab notebook with the machine type of your choice, the first step is to install Nextflow and it's dependencies. Since Colab does not provide root access, you will need to install Nextflow in the user's home directory.

Reviewer: Before this maybe point to some docs from Google on how to register and get stetup ?

After opening a Colab notebook with the machine type of your choice, the first step is to install Nextflow and its dependencies. Since Colab does not provide root access, you will need to install Nextflow in your home directory.

> Before installing Nextflow, you must install Java. In Colab, run the following commands in a code cell using the `%` and `!` prefixes, or run them directly in your terminal (without the prefixes).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before installing Nextflow, you must install Java. In Colab, run the following commands in a notebook code cell using the `%` and `!` prefixes, or run them directly in your terminal (without the prefixes).
```

```python
%cd .. # use '%'before cd to make a permanent change of directories
!sudo apt update
!sudo apt install openjdk-17-jdk
!export JAVA_HOME=/usr/lib/jvm/java-17-openjdk-amd64
!export PATH=$JAVA_HOME/bin:$PATH
!source ~/.bashrc
```

Next, install Nextflow and make it executable by running the following commands in a code cell as before:

```python
!wget -qO- https://get.nextflow.io | bash # Download Nextflow
!mv nextflow /usr/bin/nextflow # Move to a path Colab can access
!chmod +x /usr/bin/nextflow # Make it executable
!nextflow -v # Test it
```

Due to a lack of root access, it is not possible to run nf-core, or any Nextflow pipelines, using the `-profile docker` or `-profile singularity` container based configuration profiles.

That leaves the conda profile as the only way to run pipelines.

> However, as Google Colab does not support native conda functionality, you need to install the [condacolab](https://pypi.org/project/condacolab/) package, which will set up Conda for you by running the following commands:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, as Google Colab does not support native Conda functionality, you need to install the [condacolab](https://pypi.org/project/condacolab/) package, which will set up Conda for you by running the following terminal and notebook commands:
```

If I understand correctly? I don't fully understand why the CLI ocmmand has a `!` and then you switch to directly writing pyton code

Reviewer: Is it normal that in Google Colab notebooks that the primary language of the code blocks are python, or is this something you configured?

```python
!pip install -q condacolab
import condacolab
condacolab.install()
```

Make sure to set the conda defaults as follows for smooth pipeline execution:

```python

> !conda config --add channels defaults
> !conda config --add channels bioconda
> !conda config --add channels conda-forge
> !conda config --set channel_priority strict

Reviewer: ```suggestion
!conda config --add channels defaults
!conda config --add channels bioconda
!conda config --add channels conda-forge
!conda config --set channel_priority strict
```

Reviewer: I'm seeing wierd red highlights... I can't tell if that's a github markdown rendering of the python block in the reviewing interface 😅

Author: seems like a github thing

```

# Running a test pipeline

Yes, the setup is that simple!

> Now that the main parts of the environment are all set up, we can run our demo pipeline [nf-core/demo](https://nf-co.re/demo/1.0.2/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that the main parts of the environment are all set up, we can run our demo pipeline [nf-core/demo](https://nf-co.re/demo/).
```

To install the pipeline, run:

```python
! nextflow pull nf-core/demo
```

One last important step before running your pipeline, or any others in Colab, is to set the `MPLBACKEND` environment variable to `Agg`.

> This ensures that Matplotlib can render plots in a headless environment like Colab, where no display is available.

Reviewer: Like with teh blog post, I still don't get the relevance of this

    name="my-tunnel",
    git_user_name="Your Name",
    git_user_email="you@example.com",
    setup_python_version="3.13",  # Optional: Specify Python version to install with pyenv
    create_new_project="my_new_project"  # Optional: Create a new project directory
)
```

![interactive tunnel connection popup in cell output](/images/tutorials/google_colab/connect.png)

The above step allows for a lot more customization than shown here. Please refer to the library's vignette to see if any of these options will suit your needs.

Finally, in your local VS Code:

1. Ensure the [Remote Tunnels extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode.remote-server) is installed.
2. Sign in with the same GitHub account used in the notebook.
3. Open Command Palette (`Ctrl+Shift+P` or `Cmd+Shift+P`).
4. Run `Remote Tunnels: Connect to Tunnel...` and select your notebook's tunnel.

You're now seamlessly connected to Colab through VS Code and can develop Nextflow pipelines more flexibly from just about any computer.

# Tips

To avoid losing your work, always clone the nf-core pipeline you want to contribute to, or regularly push your personal pipelines to a remote repository.

> For long-term storage of results and access to your own datasets, you can mount your Google Drive in Colab:

Author: Noted, will add a similar expansion

---
title: "Running nf-core Pipelines on Google Colab"
subtitle: "A guide to running and interacting with nf-core pipelines using Colab and VS Code"
---

## Running nf-core Pipelines in Google Colab

Running nf-core pipelines can be computationally intensive, requiring resources not easily available to students, newcomers, or participants in hands-on training workshops.

> Colab offers a free and accessible platform ideal for learning, teaching, and prototyping workflows in resource-constrained environments.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Colab offers an affordable and accessible platform ideal for learning, teaching, and prototyping workflows in resource-constrained environments.
```

However out of the box it does have a few limitations, such as session timeouts and a lack of root access, which means a user needs correctly configure and setup their instance for an optimal experience.

This tutorial shows two ways in which you can use Google Colab to run nf-core pipelines entirely in the cloud, either in a browser-based execution or connected to VS Code via the `vscode-colab` package for a full development experience.

Make sure to also checkout this [blogpost](https://nf-co.re/blog/2025/nf-core-colab-guide) on this topic for more background on running nf-core pipelines using Colab.

## Setting up the environment in Google Colab

If you are new to Google Colab, you can follow the official [Google Colab Getting Started guide](https://research.google.com/colaboratory/faq.html) or the [Colab Welcome Notebook](https://colab.research.google.com/notebooks/intro.ipynb) for instructions on how to register for an account and set up your first notebook.

> After opening a Colab notebook with the machine type of your choice, the first step is to install Nextflow and its dependencies. Since Colab does not provide root access, you will need to install Nextflow in your home directory.

Reviewer 2: Resolved, I later read your blog post and saw, that you discussed it there. You may want to link it, though...

### Setting up Java for Nextflow

Before installing Nextflow, you must install Java.

In Colab, run the following commands in a notebook code cell using the `%` and `!` prefixes, or run them directly in your terminal (without the prefixes).

```python
%cd .. # use '%'before cd to make a permanent change of directories
!sudo apt update
!sudo apt install openjdk-17-jdk
!export JAVA_HOME=/usr/lib/jvm/java-17-openjdk-amd64
!export PATH=$JAVA_HOME/bin:$PATH

> !source ~/.bashrc

Author: let me try to run this and get back to ya

Due to a lack of root access, it is not possible to run nf-core, or any Nextflow pipelines, using the `-profile docker` or `-profile singularity` container based configuration profiles.

That leaves the `conda` profile as the only way to run pipelines.

However, as Google Colab does not natively support conda, you need to install the [condacolab](https://pypi.org/project/condacolab/) package, which will set up Conda for you by running the following commands:

```python
!pip install -q condacolab
import condacolab
condacolab.install()
```

Make sure to set the conda defaults as follows for smooth pipeline execution:

```python
!conda config --add channels bioconda
!conda config --add channels conda-forge
!conda config --set channel_priority strict
```

## Running a test pipeline

...and you're ready to go!

Yes, the setup is that simple!

Now that the main parts of the environment are all set up, we can run the demo pipeline [nf-core/demo](https://nf-co.re/demo/).
To install the pipeline, run:

```python
! nextflow pull nf-core/demo
```

Now you can finally run your pipeline!

```python
! nextflow run nf-core/demo -profile conda,test --outdir demo-results
```

> ## Running and Editing Pipelines in VS Code via Colab

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Connecting from your local computer to Colab using VS Code.
```

> You can do this either by running the following in a code cell:

Reviewer: I still don't understand why you need this? Or did  you reply on the other PR?

Author: Replied in the other PR, will replicate the error and send it to you

Author: So the issue does not occur when I run nf-core/demo but when I run nf-core/scdownstream.

```bash
! nextflow run ./scdownstream/ -profile conda,test --outdir /content/results --ambient_removal none --celltypist_model Adult_Human_Skin --integration_methods harmony --integration_hvgs 500 --doublet_detection scrublet,solo --skip_liana false -resume
```
``` 
executor >  local (3)
[-        ] NFC…AM:LOAD_H5AD:SCANPY_READH5 -
[-        ] NFC…AM:LOAD_H5AD:ADATA_READRDS -
[-        ] NFC…AM:LOAD_H5AD:ADATA_READCSV -
[-        ] NFC…ONTROL:GET_UNFILTERED_SIZE -
[-        ] NFC…ELLBENDER_REMOVEBACKGROUND -
[-        ] NFC…T_REMOVAL:ANNDATA_BARCODES -
[-        ] NFC…_CONTROL:GET_FILTERED_SIZE -
[-        ] NFC…EAM:QUALITY_CONTROL:QC_RAW -
[56/4db77a] NFC…CANPY_FILTER (SRR28679756) | 0 of 1
[-        ] NFC…NTROL:GET_THRESHOLDED_SIZE -
[-        ] NFC…T_DETECTION:SCVITOOLS_SOLO -
[-        ] NFC…_DETECTION:SCANPY_SCRUBLET -
[-        ] NFC…_DETECTION:DOUBLET_REMOVAL -
[-        ] NFC…NTROL:GET_DEDOUBLETED_SIZE -
[-        ] NFC…UALITY_CONTROL:QC_FILTERED -
[-        ] NFC…LITY_CONTROL:COLLECT_SIZES -
[4e/427d8b] NFC…REFERENCE (immune_celldex) | 2 of 2 ✔
[-        ] NFC…:SINGLER:CELLTYPES_SINGLER -
[-        ] NFC…NMENT:CELLTYPES_CELLTYPIST -
[-        ] NFC…TREAM:FINALIZE_QC_ANNDATAS -
Plus 17 more processes waiting for tasks…
Execution cancelled -- Finishing pending tasks before exit
-[nf-core/scdownstream] Pipeline completed with errors-
ERROR ~ Error executing process > 'NFCORE_SCDOWNSTREAM:SCDOWNSTREAM:QUALITY_CONTROL:SCANPY_FILTER (SRR28679756)'

Caused by:
  Process `NFCORE_SCDOWNSTREAM:SCDOWNSTREAM:QUALITY_CONTROL:SCANPY_FILTER (SRR28679756)` terminated with an error exit status (1)

Command executed [/content/scdownstream/modules/local/scanpy/filter/templates/filter.py]:

  #!/usr/bin/env python3
  
  import os
  import platform
  
  os.environ["MPLCONFIGDIR"] = "./tmp/mpl"
  os.environ["NUMBA_CACHE_DIR"] = "./tmp/numba"
  
  import yaml
  import scanpy as sc
  from threadpoolctl import threadpool_limits
  threadpool_limits(int("2"))
  sc.settings.n_jobs = int("2")
  
  
  adata = sc.read_h5ad("SRR28679756_filtered_matrix.h5ad")
  prefix = "SRR28679756_filtered"
  
  adata.var["mt"] = adata.var_names.str.lower().str.startswith("mt-")
  sc.pp.calculate_qc_metrics(
      adata, qc_vars=["mt"], percent_top=None, log1p=False, inplace=True
  )
  adata = adata[adata.obs.pct_counts_mt < int("100"), :].copy()
  
  sc.pp.filter_cells(adata, min_counts=int("0"))
  sc.pp.filter_genes(adata, min_counts=int("0"))
  
  sc.pp.filter_cells(adata, min_genes=int("0"))
  sc.pp.filter_genes(adata, min_cells=int("0"))
  
  adata.write_h5ad(f"{prefix}.h5ad")
  
  # Versions
  
  versions = {
      "NFCORE_SCDOWNSTREAM:SCDOWNSTREAM:QUALITY_CONTROL:SCANPY_FILTER": {
          "python": platform.python_version(),
          "scanpy": sc.__version__
      }
  }
  
  with open("versions.yml", "w") as f:
      yaml.dump(versions, f)

Command exit status:
  1

Command output:
  (empty)

Command error:
  Traceback (most recent call last):
    File ".command.sh", line 10, in <module>
      import scanpy as sc
    File "/content/work/conda/env-77fb00e4d0d5fc21-70d3b3035a508de8146128a3679e4ba5/lib/python3.13/site-packages/scanpy/__init__.py", line 48, in <module>
      from . import datasets, experimental, external, get, logging, metrics, queries
    File "/content/work/conda/env-77fb00e4d0d5fc21-70d3b3035a508de8146128a3679e4ba5/lib/python3.13/site-packages/scanpy/datasets/__init__.py", line 5, in <module>
      from ._datasets import (
      ...<10 lines>...
      )
    File "/content/work/conda/env-77fb00e4d0d5fc21-70d3b3035a508de8146128a3679e4ba5/lib/python3.13/site-packages/scanpy/datasets/_datasets.py", line 15, in <module>
      from ..readwrite import read, read_visium
    File "/content/work/conda/env-77fb00e4d0d5fc21-70d3b3035a508de8146128a3679e4ba5/lib/python3.13/site-packages/scanpy/readwrite.py", line 36, in <module>
      from matplotlib.image import imread
    File "/content/work/conda/env-77fb00e4d0d5fc21-70d3b3035a508de8146128a3679e4ba5/lib/python3.13/site-packages/matplotlib/__init__.py", line 1299, in <module>
      rcParams['backend'] = os.environ.get('MPLBACKEND')
      ~~~~~~~~^^^^^^^^^^^
    File "/content/work/conda/env-77fb00e4d0d5fc21-70d3b3035a508de8146128a3679e4ba5/lib/python3.13/site-packages/matplotlib/__init__.py", line 774, in __setitem__
      raise ValueError(f"Key {key}: {ve}") from None
  ValueError: Key backend: 'module://matplotlib_inline.backend_inline' is not a valid value for backend; supported values are ['gtk3agg', 'gtk3cairo', 'gtk4agg', 'gtk4cairo', 'macosx', 'nbagg', 'notebook', 'qtagg', 'qtcairo', 'qt5agg', 'qt5cairo', 'tkagg', 'tkcairo', 'webagg', 'wx', 'wxagg', 'wxcairo', 'agg', 'cairo', 'pdf', 'pgf', 'ps', 'svg', 'template']

Work dir:
  /content/work/56/4db77a659c6e748d41bce689abf0e8

Tip: view the complete command output by changing to the process work dir and entering the command `cat .command.out`

 -- Check '.nextflow.log' file for details
ERROR ~ Pipeline failed. Please refer to troubleshooting docs: https://nf-co.re/docs/usage/troubleshooting

 -- Check '.nextflow.log' file for details
```

Author: I have added a better explantion in the text

> While you could get away with editing existing pipelines inside Colab's built-in terminal using editors like vim or nano, a VS Code IDE offers a more robust and richer environment for development.

Author: Hadn't thought about that actually, but I think considering this might be for absolute noobs in training that make use of this approach, I think I'll expand the acronym IDE

> If you use VS Code as your normal IDE, thankfully the [vscode-colab](https://github.com/EssenceSentry/vscode-colab) Python library provides just the toolkit you need to take advantage of Colab's hardware in the comfort of the popular VSCode software suite.

Reviewer 2: Both, the _While you could get away with_ and the _take advantage of... in the comfort of the popular_ are quite generic abstract descriptions of what you are actually talking about.

I suggest putting out the motivation/purpose first and then introducing tunnels in a more layperson friendly way? Maybe something along those lines:

> Working with Colab notebooks only through the browser can feel limiting. After configuring a tunnel as a private, secure bridge to Googles servers, you can work on them as if everything were right on your computer. All the heavy lifting—running code, extensions, or commands—happens on that remote machine, while you just see the results straight in your code editor. Particularly when developing for nf-core in Colab, this setup will make your life easier.

> It allows you to securely and reliably connect a local instance of VS Code to Google Colab as well as Kaggle notebooks through the use of the official [VS Code Remote Tunnels](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/remote/tunnels) package.

Author: Agreed

You can read more about the library and even help contribute to new features on its [GitHub repository](https://github.com/EssenceSentry/vscode-colab).

:::note
If you decide to use this approach, it is best to run this immediately after setting up the other dependencies that require installation by running inside Colab cells to avoid any connection issues.
:::

The first step is to install and import the library, which can easily be done by running the following command in your Colab code cell:

```python title="Install vscode-colab"
!pip install vscode-colab
import vscode_colab
```

> Next, authenticate the connection using your GitHub credentials:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next, log in with your GitHub credentials to verify your identity. This ensures that only you can access and control your remote environment.
```

```python
vscode_colab.login()
```

![interactive login popup in cell output](/images/tutorials/google_colab/login.png)

Follow the displayed instructions to authorize the connection.

> To start the VS Code tunnel, optionally configure Git, set up a Python version, or create a new project:

Reviewer 2: _To start the VS Code tunnel, optionally_ is somewhat contradictory, no? Either something is done to start the tunnel or it is optional and the tunnel also starts without. 

```suggestion
When starting the tunnel, you can configure some optional settings that may come handy for advanced use cases.
```
I would not mention e.g. the Python version. Only nf-core tools is written in Python, which runs on many current versions and the default Git configuration will probably do, no?

```python
vscode_colab.connect(
    name="my-tunnel",
    git_user_name="Your Name",
    git_user_email="you@example.com",
    setup_python_version="3.13",  # Optional: Specify Python version to install with pyenv
    create_new_project="my_new_project"  # Optional: Create a new project directory
)
```

![interactive tunnel connection popup in cell output](/images/tutorials/google_colab/connect.png)

The above step allows for a lot more customization than shown here. Please refer to the library's [vignette](https://github.com/EssenceSentry/vscode-colab) to see if any of these options will suit your needs.

Then, in your local VS Code:

1. Ensure the [Remote Tunnels extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode.remote-server) is installed.

> 2. Sign in with the same GitHub account used in the notebook.

Reviewer 2: I think, this requires more clarification. Instead of promoting contributing to the library, stress that we are now leaving the browser and opening the code editor as the new primary interface for interacting with the Colab notebook.

!sudo apt update
!sudo apt install openjdk-17-jdk
!export JAVA_HOME=/usr/lib/jvm/java-17-openjdk-amd64
!export PATH=$JAVA_HOME/bin:$PATH
!source ~/.bashrc
```

### Installing and Setting up Nextflow

Next, install Nextflow and make it executable by running the following commands in a code cell as before:

```python
!wget -qO- https://get.nextflow.io | bash # Download Nextflow
!mv nextflow /usr/bin/nextflow # Move to a path Colab can access
!chmod +x /usr/bin/nextflow # Make it executable
!nextflow -v # Test it
```

### Setting Up Conda for Google Colab

Due to a lack of root access, it is not possible to run nf-core, or any Nextflow pipelines, using the `-profile docker` or `-profile singularity` container based configuration profiles.

That leaves the `conda` profile as the only way to run pipelines.

However, as Google Colab does not natively support conda, you need to install the [condacolab](https://pypi.org/project/condacolab/) package, which will set up Conda for you by running the following commands:

```python
!pip install -q condacolab
import condacolab
condacolab.install()
```

Make sure to set the conda defaults as follows for smooth pipeline execution:

```python

> !conda config --add channels defaults

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

We should not include defaults as it's acually a paid/restricte service!

!conda config --add channels bioconda
!conda config --add channels conda-forge
!conda config --set channel_priority strict
```

## Running a test pipeline

...and you're ready to go!

Yes, the setup is that simple!

Now that the main parts of the environment are all set up, we can run the demo pipeline [nf-core/demo](https://nf-co.re/demo/).
To install the pipeline, run:

```python
! nextflow pull nf-core/demo
```

> ### Preventing Matplotlib Backend Errors in Colab

Reviewer: OK based on your explanation, I think this is actually very specific to running specific pipelines with specific conda versions of tools - we should remove this section here in the tutorial, but you can keep that in the blog post as it's 'your experience', does that sound OK?
